Write Code Like You Just Learned How to Program
===============================================

- Artículo extraído desde:
 [https://prog21.dadgum.com/87.html](https://prog21.dadgum.com/87.html)

I'm reading [Do More
Faster](http://www.amazon.com/Do-More-Faster-TechStars-Accelerate/dp/0470929839),
which is more than a bit of an advertisement for the TechStars start-up
incubator, but it's a good read nonetheless. What struck me is that
several of the people who went through the program, successfully enough
to at least get initial funding, didn't know how to program. They
learned it so they could implement their start-up ideas.

Think about that. It's like having a song idea and learning to play an
instrument so you can make it real. I suspect that the learning process
in this case would horrify most professional musicians, but that horror
doesn't necessarily mean that it's a bad idea, or that the end result
won't be successful. After all, look at how many bands find success
without the benefit of a degree in music theory.

I already knew how to program when I took an "Intro to BASIC" class in
high school. One project was to make a visual demo using the
sixteen-color, low-res mode of the Apple II. I quickly put together
something algorithmic, looping across the screen coordinates and drawing
lines and changing colors. It took me about half an hour to write and
tweak, and I was done.

I seriously underestimated what people would create.

One guy presented this amazing demo full of animation and shaded images.
I'm talking crazy stuff, like a skull that dripped blood from its eye
into a rising pool at the bottom of the screen. And that was just one
segment of his project. I was stunned. Clearly I wasn't the hotshot
programmer I thought was.

I eventually saw the BASIC listing for his program. It was hundreds and
hundreds of lines of statements to change colors and draw points and
lines. There were no loops or variables. To animate the blood he drew a
red pixel, waited, then drew another red pixel below it. All the
coordinates were hard-coded. How did he keep track of where to draw
stuff? He had a piece of graph paper that he updated as he went.

My prior experience hurt me in this case. I was thinking about the
*program*, and how I could write something that was concise and clean.
The guy who wrote the skull demo wasn't worried about any of that. He
didn't care about what the program looked like or how maintainable it
was. He just wanted a way to present his vision.

There's a lesson there that's easy to forget--or ignore. It's extremely
difficult to be simultaneously concerned with the end-user experience of
whatever it is that you're building and the architecture of the program
that delivers that experience. Maybe impossible. I think the only way to
pull it off is to simply not care about the latter. Write comically
straightforward code, as if you just learned to program, and go out of
your way avoid wearing any kind of software engineering hat--unless what
you really want to be is a software engineer, and not the designer of an
experience.

