The Productivity Funnel
=======================

- Artículo extraído desde:
 [calnewport.com/blog](https://www.calnewport.com/blog/2021/04/20/the-productivity-funnel)

In light of our recent discussions of “productivity,” both in this newsletter
and on my podcast, I thought it might be useful to provide a more formal
definition of what exactly I mean when I reference this concept.

In the most general sense, productivity is about navigating from a large
constellation of possible things you could be doing to the actual execution of
a much smaller number of things each day.

At one extreme, you could implement this navigation haphazardly: executing, in
the moment, whatever grabs your attention as interesting or unavoidably urgent.
At the other extreme, you might deploy a fully geeked out, productivity
pr0n-style optimized collection of tools to precisely prioritize your
obligations.

![](/images/link-files/productivity-funnel.png)

To make sense of these varied journeys from a broad array of potential activity
to the narrowed scope of actual execution, I often imagine the three-level
funnel diagramed above.


The funnel begins with the fundamental task of selection, where you determine
which activities to commit to accomplish. Relevant ideas for this level can be
found in books like First Things First, Essentialism, How to Do Nothing, One
Thing, The Dip, and Year of Yes.

Once committed, these activities must then go through processing, organization,
     and storage. There are two goals for this funnel level: to avoid
     forgetting what you’re supposed to do, and to make smart decisions about
     what to work on next. Relevant ideas for this level can be found in books
     like Getting Things Done and The Bullet Journal Method. This is also where
     the Capture/Configure/Control philosophy I talk about on my podcast, or
     software like OmniFocus, Trello, Basecamp, and Asana, can help.

The final level focuses on the actual execution of whatever it is you’ve figure
out you should be doing in the moment. This includes how you plan your day, the
rituals you deploy to support your efforts, and the processes you’ve put in
place to support more effective collaboration with others. Relevant ideas for
this level can be found in books like Deep Work, A World Without Email, Daily
Rituals, The War of Art, and Bird by Bird. Planning tools like my Time Block
Planner are also useful here.

There are obvious benefits to defining the concept of productivity with this
level of detail.

For one thing, it helps avoid the common mistake of focusing on one part of the
funnel while avoiding others. There are many deep work aficionados, for
example, who are obsessive about their depth rituals (execution), but are
constantly forgetting or losing track of what’s on their plate (organization).

Similarly, it’s common to come across productivity geeks with complex
organizational systems, who pay little attention to their overall workload
(selection), and end up hopelessly overwhelmed, no matter how much they
optimize their OmniFocus configuration.

By clearly delineating the three different levels of the productivity funnel,
   you can make sure each level gets at least some attention.

This detailed definition also adds nuance to anti-productivity criticism. A lot
of this recent debate loosely associates the term “productivity” with an
exploitative capitalist drive to maximize accomplishment. When viewed against
the specificity of the productivity funnel, however, it becomes clear that this
critique more accurately concerns only the activity selection level.

I agree that there’s an important debate to be had about how organizations and
individuals implement activity selection (e.g., my recent post on slow
productivity), but regardless of where this debate takes us, the other
levels of the funnel remain important and largely orthogonal. In a
post-capitalist collectivist utopia, where work is optional, and we’ve excised
our souls of our past bourgeois internalization of the narratives of
production, we’ll still have things we need to get done, and having an
organizational system will still be better than haphazardly trying to keep
track of these things in our minds (even Lenin had a task list).

Similarly, intentionality about execution can often enhance — not impede —
slower lifestyles. If you don’t give serious thought to how you want to
structure your days, it’s all too easy to fall back into distraction and
shallow busyness.

I’m not sure if the funnel proposed above is complete. Indeed, I’m almost
certainly missing aspects of productivity that are equally as important as the
three levels I detail. But the more general movement here toward clarity in
what we mean when we talk about productivity is worth encouraging.
