
Weizenbaum examines computers abd society
=========================================

- Artículo extraído desde:
 [https://web.archive.org/web/20090325194547/https://tech.mit.edu/V105/N16/weisen.16n.html](https://web.archive.org/web/20090325194547/https://tech.mit.edu/V105/N16/weisen.16n.html)
 
*Professor Joseph Weizenbaum is well-known, both as a teacher of
computer science and as an activist for scientific and educational
responsibility. He designed the first computerized banking system before
coming to MIT in the 1960s. He invented ELIZA, the first "psychiatric"
program, and was moved by the reaction to it to write the best-selling*
Computer Power and Human Reason*.*

**Q: *What, if anything, do you think should be the role of the computer
in education?***

I'll tell you my reaction to that question without answering it
directly. There's a Russian joke that goes something like this: Two
people are standing in a very large breadline in Moscow, and they're
talking about the fact that the harvest failed once more and that's why
there's a shortage of bread, and one of them says to the other, "You
know, it's all the fault of the Jews and the bicyclists." The other one
says, "Why the bicyclists?" and the first one answers, "Why the Jews?"

You might have said "What is the role of computers and bicycles in
education?" Then I would have said, "Why the bicycles?" and you "Why the
computer?"

**A:** Yours is an often-asked question. In a sense, it is upside-down.
You start with the instrument; the question makes the assumption that of
course the computer is good for *something* in education, that it is the
solution to some educational problem. Specifically, \[your\] question
is, what is it good for?

But where does the underlying assumption come from? Why are we talking
about computers?I understand \[you asked because\] I'm a computer
scientist, not a bicycle mechanic. But There is something about the
computer -- the computer has almost since its beginning been basically a
solution looking for a problem.

People come to MIT and to other places, people from all sorts of
establishments -- the medical establishment, the legal establishment,
the education establishment, and in effect they say, "You have there a
very wonderful instrument which solves a lot of problems. Surely there
must be problems in my establishment -- in this case, the educational
establishment, for which your wonderful instrument is a solution. Please
tell me for what problems your wonderful instrument is a solution.

The questioning should start the other way -- it should perhaps start
with the question of what education is supposed to accomplish in the
first place.Then perhaps \[one should\] state some priorities -- it
should accomplish this, it should do that, it should do the other thing.
Then one might ask, in terms of what it's supposed to do, what are the
priorities? What are the most urgent problems? And once one has
identified the urgent problems, then one can perhaps say, "Here is a
problem for which the computer seems to be well-suited." I think that's
the way it has to begin.

**Q: *What are the problems of the educational establishment?***

**A:** The first priority has to be, it seems to me, to lend to those to
be educated a mastery of their own language so that they can express
themselves clearly and with precision, in speech and in writing.That's
the very first priority. The second priority is to give students an
entree to and an identity within the culture of their society, which
implies a study of history, literature, and all that.

And the third, very close to the second, is to prepare people for living
in a society in which science is important, which means to teach them
mathematics, or at least arithmetic, and the fundamental skills
important to observing the world.

A school system which meets these main objectives might think about
introducing something new. Meanwhile, researchers should certainly work
on innovative education -- including computer-aided education. But we
ought not to use entire generations of schoolchildren as experimental
subjects.

In part, this response is based on my belief that what primary and
secondary schools teach about computers now is either wrong or can be
learned by a reasonably educated person in a few weeks.

Q: Where do you think the study of ethics fits in\[to\] all that?

A: Without being able to express themselves clearly, without having a
mastery of their own language, I think it would be very difficult, to
the point of impossibility, for people to think through ethical
considerations. I think that mastery of the languages has to be first
even in that respect as well. In the study of history of the culture,
the literature of the culture, the politics of the culture, and so on --
that's where I think ethics are exemplified.

A question that we should ask is,

Now how well are the schools fulfilling the first priorities? Certainly
the answer with respect to language is miserably, absolutely miserably.

MIT certainly gets the cream of the crop of the product of the American
school establishment, yet there was a headline in your paper just a few
months ago which said that out of a 1000-some freshmen who took the
writing test, 800 flunked. How is it then for people who are going to
junior colleges? How does it look for people who aren't going to college
at all? How does it look for people who dropped out of school when they
were 14 or 15? Clearly the American school establishment is failing very
seriously.

It is terribly important to ask the reasons the schools are failing so
miserably. I think that even if one could show that the introduction of
the computer into schools actually effected an improvement, say for
example in reading scores, even if one could show that, the question,
"Why can't Johnny read?" must still be asked.

There is a very good reason that questions of that kind are
uncomfortable. When we ask this question, we may discover that Johnny is
hungry when he comes to school, or that Johnny comes from a milieu in
which reading is irrelevant to concrete problems or survival on the
street -- that is, there is no chance to read, it is a violent milieu,
and so on.

You might discover that, and then you might ask the next question: "Why
is it that Johnny comes to school hungry? Don't we have school breakfast
programs and lunch programs?" The answer to that might be, yes, we used
to, but we don't any more.

Why is there so much poverty in our world, in the United States,
especially in the large cities? Why is it that classes are so large? Why
is it that fully half the science and math teachers in the United States
are underqualified and are operating on emergency certificates?

When you ask questions like that, you come upon some very important and
very tragic facts about America. One of the things you would discover is
that education has a very much lower priority in the United States than
do a great many other things, most particularly the military.

It is much nicer, it is much more comfortable, to have some device, say
the computer, with which to flood the schools, and then to sit back and
say, "You see, we are doing something about it, we are helping," than to
confront ugly social realities.

Q: What do you think should be done instead?

A: I think that further questions should be asked, always "why?" just in
the way I've indicated. And then I think it becomes necessary to respond
to what these questions uncover, to change the fundamental facts that
account for the difficulties, as opposed to papering them over by
introducing some technological fix.

**Q: *Do you think that the computer is creating a technical elite,
reinforcing old power structures, or remaking American society?***

**A:** I think the computer has from the beginning been a fundamentally
conservative force. It has made possible the saving of institutions
pretty much as they were, which otherwise might have had to be changed.
For example, banking. Superficially, it looks as if banking has been
revolutionized by the computer. But only very superficially. Consider
that, say 20, 25 years ago, the banks were faced with the fact that the
population was growing at a very rapid rate, many more checks would be
written than before, and so on. Their response was to bring in the
computer. By the way, I helped design the first computer banking system
in the United States, for the Bank of America 25 years ago.

Now if it had not been for the computer, if the computer had not been
invented, what would the banks have had to do? They might have had to
decentralize, or they might have had to regionalize in some way. In
other words, it might have been necessary to introduce a social
invention, as opposed to the technical invention.

What the coming of the computer did, "just in time," was to make it
unnecessary to create social inventions, to change the system in any
way. So in that sense, the computer has acted as fundamentally a
conservative force, a force which kept power or even solidified power
where is already existed.

**Q: *Did you have these concerns when you were designing the banking
system?***

**A:** Not in the slightest. It was a very technical job, it was a very
hard job, there were a number of very, very difficult problems., for
example, to design a machine that would handle paper checks of various
sizes, some of which might have been crumpled in a person's pockets and
so on, to handle those the way punch cards are handled in a punch card
machine and so on. There were many very hard technical problems. It was
a whale of a lot of fun attacking those hard problems, and it never
occurred to me at the time that I was cooperating in a technological
venture which had certain social side effects which I might come to
regret. That never occured to me; I was totally wrapped up in my
identity as a professional, and besides, it was just too much fun.

**Q: *When did it occur to you?***

**A:** I think after spending say 10 years at MIT -- I came here in
1963. Much of that time, much of \[the next\] 10 years were very
turbulent years politically ... Soon after I got here, President Kennedy
was assassinated. There was the dream of the Great Society that
President Johnson announced, and the civil rights movement, it was very
hard-fought, and I of course participated, and the Vietnam War.

The knowledge of behavior of German academics during the Hitler time
weighed on me very heavily. I was born in Germany, I couldn't relax and
sit by and watch the university in which I now participated behaving in
the same way. I had to become engaged in social and political questions.
Once that happened I started to think and write about issues of this
kind, some realities became increasingly clear to me.

Writing is very much like computer programming; when you sit down to
write a program chances are you have a very good idea of what it is you
want to do, you have a very good idea of what algorithm you're going to
use. In a certain sense, you believe, or you act as if, you've already
solved the problem and it's only a question of writing down the
solution. So it is when you start to write in ordinary language. It's
perfectly clear to many people, at MIT certainly, that in the act of
programming you discover new ideas, and most particularly you discover
that there are deep holes in your knowledge that you have to fill before
you go on. That happens with writing too. So when I started to write
about these things, sometimes just more or less for myself, or in
letters to others, the realities I am talking about became clear to me.

**Q: *What about computers and the military?***

**A:** The computer was of course born to the military, so to speak. In
the United States, the first fully functioning computer was created in
order to compute ballistifc trajectories. And in England, to help
decipher military codes, Carl Zuse built his computer in order to deal
with mathematical problems wich aries in the design of military
aircraft.

In all three instances, the computer was the child of the military to
begin with. Certainly after the Second World War the baton, so to speak,
was passed to the Americans, the leadership for developing the computer
came into American hands, and from that point to this I think it is safe
to say that by far most of the research and development of computers has
been paid for with military money, directly or indirectly.

It is also safe to say, it is simply a matter of fact, that to date
weapons which threaten to wipe out the human species altogether could
not be made and could certainly not be delivered with any sort of
precision were it not for the computers which guide these weapons.

The computer is very deeply involved with the military. Today it counts
as the beating heart of virtually every modern military system you can
think of with the exception of the foot soldier.

In their book on the fifth generation, Ed Feigenbaum of Stanford
University and Pamela McCorduck say that present "smart weapons" will
seem like the wind-up toys compared to the weapons we will have once
we've entered the use of the fifth generation of computers; that is,
have properly introduced artificial intelligence, vision and so on, into
weapons.

So from the very beginning, the computer was basically a military
instrument, it's continued to be, and now with the so-called Strategic
Defense Initiative, the computer promises to be firmly embedded in the
military systems of the world. There is just no doubt about that.

**Q: *So to be a computer science professional very often means to be
working in defense?***

**A:** I would endorse that sentence, except that I would wish either
that the last word be put in quotes, or that you change the sentence to
read "...to be involved in the military."

And you know, "the military" certainly is very considerably less
euphemistic than to say "defense." Now I understand that we're
threatened by great forces, like Grenada, Cuba, and Nicaragua, for
example, and we have to defend ourselves against them, but the
terminology "the military" still hides the reality.

When we think today, for example, of the masses of computers in
helicopters, and in all sorts of mobile things like tanks and airplanes,
and we think of the many places on earth where these machines are being
used every day, whether it is in Afghanistan or someplace in Africa,
then the term "the military" also deserves to be replaced with something
considerably harsher.

Instead of saying the computer is involved with the military, say the
computer is involved with killing people. It is only when you come to
that vocabulary, I think, that the euphemism begins to disappear, and I
think it's very important that it disappear.

**Q: *How can people continue to do this, knowing that the things they
build will be involved in killing people?***

**A:** People have a series of rationalizations. People say for example
that science and technology have their own logic, that they are in fact
autonomous. This particular rationalization is profoundly false. It is
not true that science marches on in defiance of human will, independent
of human will, that just is not the case. But it is comfortable, as I
said: it leads to the position that "if I don't do it, someone else
will."

Of course if one takes that as an ethical principle then obviously it
can serve as a license to do anything at all. "People will be murdered;
if I don't do it, someone else will." "Women will be raped; if I don't
do it, someone else will." That is just a license for violence.

Other people say, and I think this is a widely used rationalization,
that fundamentally the tools we work on are "mere" tools; This means
that whether they get use for good or evil depends on the person who
ultimately buys them and so on.

There's nothing bad about working in computer vision, for example.
Computer vision may very well some day be used to heal people who would
otherwise die. Of course, it could also be used to guide missiles,
cruise missiles for example, to their destination, and all that. You
see, tthe technology itself is neutral and value-free and it just
depends how one uses it. And besides -- consistent with that -- we can't
know, we scientists cannot know how it is going to be used. So therefore
we have no responsibility.

Well, that is false. It is true that a computer, for example, can be
used for good or evil. It is true that a helicopter can be used as a
gunship and it can also be used to rescue people from a mountain pass.
And if the question arises of how a specific device is going to be used,
in what I call an abstract ideal society, then one might very well say
one cannot know.

But we live in a concrete society, \[and\] with concrete social and
historical circumstances and political realities in this society, it is
perfectly obvious that when something like a computer is invented, then
it is going to be adopted will be for military purposes. It follows from
the concrete realities in which we live, it does not follow from pure
logic. But we're not living in an abstract society, we're living in the
society in which we in fact live.

If you look at the enormous fruits of human genius that mankind has
developed in the last 50 years, atomic energy and rocketry and flying to
the moon and coherent light, and it goes on and on and on -- and then it
turns out that every one of these triumphs is used primarily in military
terms. So it is not reasonable for a scientist or technologist to insist
that he or she does not know -- or ca not know -- how it is going to be
used.

**Q: Do you think the younger generation of computer scientists coming
out of MIT has these concerns?**

**A:** I do not know. I just do not know. I should think that if concern
were very widespread, if it were deep-rooted, then perhaps progress in
computer development might be somewhat slower than it is. So I do not
think that younger people are concerned about these things today. But I
have very little way of measuring it. I hope I am wrong.

Of course, it's not only computers that come into play here.the support
that the Institute generally gets from the military, which is to say the
Department of Defense and to a certain extent the Department of Energy,
makes it pretty clear that it is not only computer science which is
involved here.

By the way, let me say an additional rationalization for working on
these things is that there will be wonderful fallout. We get the space
program, and out of the space program we get missiles which can
devastate the earth in a very few minutes, but we also get other things
-- Teflon, for example, and all this computer stuff, and the
miniaturization, the microminiaturization of components and so on,
eventually gives us electronic watches. This is a derivative of "things
can be used for good or evil."

But I think the following: that if one were to ask the medical community
in the United States to do research on bacteriological warfare -- that
is, to actually go to a laboratory somewhere in the United States and
engage in that work -- that most medical people would refuse.

If they were told that out of this would come antitoxins and all sorts
of other good and useful products, just as fallout, I think the medical
community would in general say, "Well, if we're after antitoxins and
other medicines, then let us work on that. To work on that by way of
working on bacteriological warfare seems to us insane." I think the rest
of the scientific and engineering community might adopt a similar
stance.

**Q: *But they haven't already?***

**A:** Certainly not ... Certainly the most frequent justification one
hears for working, for example, on the strategic computing initiative is
described by the military to be fundamentally three weapons systems and
nothing else, there is no mystery about it, and , is that we will have
wonderful consumer products. for example, one member of the laboratory I
am in, the Laboratory for Computer Science, seriously and in print
suggested we might have television sets on which we can change the
channels by voice command as a by-product of the Strategic Computing
Initiative -- see, isn't that wonderful?

**Q: *What is your greatest fear for the future?***

**A:** I have children, let me say, first of all. And of course at this
university as at others one sees very many young people. My greatest
concern is that these young people won't ever be permitted to grow up,
ever to get as old as I am now. I think that is a very realistic fear.
